Add tables to merge report (#632)
AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf: templates/merge-report.Rmd

)
```

```{r}
# define a simple function for creating tables
make_kable <- function(df) {
  knitr::kable(df, align = "r") |>
    kableExtra::kable_styling(
      bootstrap_options = "striped",
      full_width = FALSE,
      position = "left"
    ) |>
    kableExtra::column_spec(2, monospace = TRUE)
}
```

```{r}
# check that input files are provided
if (is.null(params$merged_sce)) {
  stop("Must provide a merged SCE object.")
}

# define merged sce

> merged_sce <- params$merged_sce

Reviewer: At first I was worried this would cause memory problems (like, we don't need two copies of this floating around for giant merged objects with 100+ libraries!) but upon further exploration I'm pretty sure this is a shallow copy, so 👍 !

My further exploration, for posterity...

```
> x <- list(a = 100, b = 100)
> y <- x$a
> lobstr::ref(x)
█ [1:0x123515848] <named list> 
├─a = [2:0x120ba1020] <dbl> 
└─b = [3:0x120ba1058] <dbl> 
> lobstr::ref(y)
[1:0x120ba1020] <dbl> 
```

Reviewer 2: This isn't quite the whole story, as R only copies objects when they're modified. I think there may be some subtle detail with SCE objects specifically, and I don't know if there is any difference with `params` but as long as we aren't modifying the SCE as part of the report, it should not matter. 

If you want to see this in action, make `x$a` a nested list and then modify an element of it in `y`.

Reviewer: >  but as long as we aren't modifying the SCE as part of the report, it should not matter.

Not modifying as far as I've seen...and coded! We pull all the info we need out as part of this PR with `scuttle::makePerCellDF()`. So we should be good!

# define batch column
batch_column <- params$batch_column

> # set adt/ multiplex values

Reviewer: ocd comment
```suggestion
# set adt/multiplex values
```

> has_adt <- "adt" %in% merged_sce$additional_modalities
> is_multiplexed <- "cellhash" %in% merged_sce$additional_modalities

Reviewer: If you took my `metadata()` suggestion, update here accordingly - 

```suggestion
has_adt <- "adt" %in% metadata(merged_sce)$additional_modalities
is_multiplexed <- "cellhash" %in% metadata(merged_sce)$additional_modalities
```

The libraries included in the merged object are _NOT integrated or batch-corrected_.
To conduct any downstream analyses that require batch correction (e.g., UMAP or clustering), batch correction must be performed separately. 

> # Library statistics 

Reviewer: This section is mostly information and counts. While counts are a statistic, the phrase "Library statistics" implies to me more heavy-duty stats. 

What do you think of renaming? Along those lines, I wonder if we might also want to add a sentence like "for more in-depth library statistics, please refer to individual library QC reports."

```suggestion
# Library information 
```

```{r}
# extract coldata as data frame to use to create tables
coldata_df <- colData(merged_sce) |>

>   as.data.frame()

Reviewer: Since later for UMAPs I'm also making a data frame, maybe we should just make that data frame here (and call it `sce_df` or something) and use it moving forward for both tables and UMAP.

https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/blob/f4ff899344a8f9eec33c6c937777bfa34f0691a4/templates/merge-report.Rmd#L124-L128

num_libraries <- merged_sce$library_id |>
  unique() |>
  length()
```

The merged object summarized in this report is comprised of `r num_libraries` individual libraries.
The following table shows a summary of the types of libraries represented.

- `Technology version` indicates which 10X Genomics kit was used for library preparation.

> - `Experimental factor ontology` indicates the associated Experimental factor ontology (EFO) for the specified 10X version. 

Reviewer: Should we link?

```suggestion
- `Experimental factor ontology` indicates the associated [Experimental factor ontology](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/) (EFO) for the specified 10X version. 
```

> - `Experimental factor ontology` indicates the associated Experimental factor ontology (EFO) for the specified 10X version. 

Reviewer: No link? 

Since we also have cell/nucleus in this table, I wonder if `Technology EFO` might be a better name for this column? Makes it a little quicker for users to see what the EFO refers to (10X, not suspension). What do you think?

> - `Cell or Nucleus` indicates if the library was prepared from a single-cell (`cell`) or single-nuclei (`nucleus`) suspension. 

Reviewer: both singular, unless convention says to use `nuclei` (you would know better than me!)

```suggestion
- `Cell or Nucleus` indicates if the library was prepared from a single-cell (`cell`) or single-nucleus (`nucleus`) suspension. 
```

Author: Just a note that we use `single-nuclei` throughout the docs and the portal, which is why I'm using it here.

```{r}
# table summarizing number of libraries with tech version and seq unit
tech_table <- coldata_df |>
  dplyr::select(library_id, tech_version, assay_ontology_term_id, seq_unit) |>
  dplyr::distinct() |>

>   dplyr::count(tech_version, assay_ontology_term_id, seq_unit) |>

Reviewer: FYI you can use the argument `name = "Number of libraries"` when `count`ing if you want, but I do like having all the column naming in the same spot. Probably fine to keep as is.

Author: Yes, I purposely wanted to rename everything and I don't like working with column names that have spaces so I'm adding all the column name reformatting at the end.

  dplyr::arrange(desc(n)) |>
  dplyr::rename(
    "Technology version" = "tech_version",
    "Experimental factor ontology" = "assay_ontology_term_id",
    "Cell or Nucleus" = "seq_unit",
    "Number of libraries" = "n"

>   )

Reviewer: Just FYI, you don't need quotes anywhere for `dplyr::rename()`, same as `dplyr::select()`. It's not a problem though!

For example, this words fine: `iris |> dplyr::rename(x = Species)`

Author: I'm using quotes here because I'm adding spaces to the column names.

Reviewer: > I'm using quotes here because I'm adding spaces to the column names.

:100:, but like `seq_unit` could stand as is. Either way it definitely doesn't matter!

knitr::kable(tech_table, align = "r") |>
  kableExtra::kable_styling(
    bootstrap_options = "striped",
    full_width = FALSE,
    position = "left"
  ) |>

>   kableExtra::column_spec(2, monospace = TRUE)

Reviewer: We use this a couple times, so let's make it a function, maybe with the styling values (align, striping, position, etc.) as defaults. (But it looks like they are the same throughout, so maybe we can get away with hardcoding here?) 

Something like -

```
make_kable <- function(df, default, kable, styling, if, you, want) {
  knitr::kable(df, align = "r") |>
    kableExtra::kable_styling(
      bootstrap_options = "striped",
      full_width = FALSE,
      position = "left"
    ) |>
    kableExtra::column_spec(2, monospace = TRUE)
}
```

```

```{r, eval=has_adt}
knitr::asis_output(glue::glue(
  "

>   This merged object contains one or more libraries with accompanying ADT expression data.

Reviewer: spell it out the first time - 
```suggestion
  This merged object contains one or more libraries with accompanying antibody-derived tag (ADT) expression data.
```

  dplyr::distinct() |>
  dplyr::mutate(
    is_multiplexed = ifelse(additional_modalities == "cellhash", "Multiplexed", "No multiplexing")
  ) |>
  dplyr::count(is_multiplexed) |>
  dplyr::rename(
    "Library type" = "is_multiplexed",
    "Number of libraries" = "n"
  )

knitr::kable(multiplex_table, align = "r") |>
  kableExtra::kable_styling(
    bootstrap_options = "striped",
    full_width = FALSE,
    position = "left"
  ) |>
  kableExtra::column_spec(2, monospace = TRUE)
```

# Sample statistics

```{r, results='asis'}
if (is_multiplexed) {
  glue::glue("
    <div class=\"alert alert-info\">

    The libraries included in the merged object are multiplexed.
    No demultiplexing has been done, so no sample statistics will be displayed.

    </div>
  ")
}
```

```{r, eval=!is_multiplexed}
# get total number of samples and libraries
num_samples <- merged_sce$sample_id |>
  unique() |>
  length()
```

```{r, eval=!is_multiplexed, results='asis'}
glue::glue(
  "
  The merged object summarized in this report contains {num_samples} samples.
  "
)
```

## Diagnoses

Below is a table showing the total number of samples associated with each diagnoses. 

> If subdiagnosis is available, the total number of samples will be obtained for each unique combination of diagnosis and subdiagnosis. 

Reviewer: Noticing there is no table here, and also for `disease stage` next, for the multiplexed example report you provided. I'm assuming that the lack of diagnoses table is an artifact of test data(?), but we may not always have disease stage information for all libraries. Is that worth a blue box "no disease stage information is available so there is no table"?

Author: I'm purposely not including anything about the samples in the multiplexed report, see the warning that gets printed instead. Because we don't demux, no sample metadata has been added to the `colData` of the merged object. I also think it could be confusing if we don't demux to talk about samples.

Author: Also we will always have disease stage. It's a requirement for all samples being submitted.

```{r, eval=!is_multiplexed}
# table of diagnosis
diagnosis_table <- coldata_df |>
  dplyr::select(sample_id, diagnosis, subdiagnosis) |>
  dplyr::distinct()

# if subdiagnosis is present, summarize both

> if (!all(is.na(diagnosis_table$Subdiagnosis))) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if (!all(is.na(diagnosis_table$subdiagnosis))) {
```

  diagnosis_table <- diagnosis_table |>
    dplyr::count(diagnosis, subdiagnosis) |>
    dplyr::arrange(desc(n)) |>
    dplyr::rename(
      "Diagnosis" = "diagnosis",
      "Subdiagnosis" = "subdiagnosis",
      "Number of samples" = "n"
    )
} else {
  # otherwise only count diagnosis
  diagnosis_table <- diagnosis_table |>

>     dplyr::select(-subdiagnosis) |>

Reviewer: This shouldn't be needed; `dplyr::count()` should only retain relevant columns (here, `diagnosis`)
```suggestion
```

  kableExtra::kable_styling(
    bootstrap_options = "striped",
    full_width = FALSE,
    position = "left"
  ) |>
  kableExtra::column_spec(2, monospace = TRUE)
```

```{r, eval=multiplexed }
knitr::asis_output(glue::glue(
  "
  This merged object contains one or more libraries that have been multiplexed.
  The table below summarizes the number of libraries that have and have not been multiplexed.
  "
))

# count number of libraries with and without multiplexing
multiplex_table <- coldata_df |>
  dplyr::select(library_id, additional_modalities) |>
  dplyr::distinct() |>
  dplyr::mutate(
    is_multiplexed = ifelse(additional_modalities == "cellhash", "Multiplexed", "No multiplexing")
  ) |>
  dplyr::count(is_multiplexed) |>
  dplyr::rename(
    "Library type" = "is_multiplexed",
    "Number of libraries" = "n"
  )

knitr::kable(multiplex_table, align = "r") |>
  kableExtra::kable_styling(
    bootstrap_options = "striped",
    full_width = FALSE,
    position = "left"
  ) |>
  kableExtra::column_spec(2, monospace = TRUE)
```

# Sample statistics

```{r, results='asis'}
if (multiplexed) {
  glue::glue("
    <div class=\"alert alert-info\">

>     The libraries included in the merged object are multiplexed.

Reviewer: This phrasing feels a bit off given that _before_ this we write, "This merged object contains one or more libraries that have been multiplexed" (which I like). 

This sentence implies that all libraries are multiplexed. Why don't we use the actual number of multiplexed? First pull it out of the data frame into a variable like `n_multiplexed`, and then add it in here to say "{n_multiplexed} libraries in the merged object are multiplexed."

What do you think?

>     No demultiplexing has been done, so no sample statistics will be displayed.

Reviewer: I kind of like "not" instead of "no," but I don't feel super strongly if we think there's a good reason to lead with "No" (something something psychology). 
```suggestion
   Demultiplexing has not been performed, so sample statistics will not be displayed.
```

The libraries included in the merged object are _NOT integrated or batch-corrected_.
To conduct any downstream analyses that require batch correction (e.g., UMAP or clustering), batch correction must be performed separately. 

# Library information 

```{r}
# extract coldata as data frame to use to create tables and UMAPs
coldata_df <- scuttle::makePerCellDF(merged_sce, use.dimred = "UMAP") |>
  dplyr::rename(
    UMAP1 = UMAP.1,
    UMAP2 = UMAP.2
  )

num_libraries <- merged_sce$library_id |>
  unique() |>
  length()
```

> The merged object summarized in this report is comprised of `r num_libraries` individual libraries.
> The following table shows a summary of the types of libraries represented.

Reviewer: Could we actually shorten this into one sentence? I thought of this because I was tempted to change the phrasing "shows a summary of" to "summarizes," and then realized the two sentences would have the same verb! What do you think?

```suggestion
The merged object summarized in this report is comprised of `r num_libraries` individual libraries, which are described in the following table.
```

    "Number of libraries" = "n"
  )

make_kable(tech_table)
```

```{r, eval=has_adt}
knitr::asis_output(glue::glue(
  "
  This merged object contains one or more libraries with accompanying antibody-derived tag (ADT) expression data.
  The following table summarizes the number of libraries with and without ADT data.
  "
))

# count number of libraries with and without ADT
adt_table <- coldata_df |>
  dplyr::select(library_id, additional_modalities) |>
  dplyr::distinct() |>
  dplyr::mutate(
    contains_adt = ifelse(additional_modalities == "adt", "Contains ADT", "No ADT")
  ) |>
  dplyr::count(contains_adt) |>
  dplyr::rename(
    "Library type" = "contains_adt",
    "Number of libraries" = "n"
  )

make_kable(adt_table)
```

```{r, eval=multiplexed }
knitr::asis_output(glue::glue(
  "
  This merged object contains one or more libraries that have been multiplexed.
  The following table summarizes the number of libraries that have and have not been multiplexed.
  "
))

# count number of libraries with and without multiplexing
multiplex_table <- coldata_df |>
  dplyr::select(library_id, additional_modalities) |>
  dplyr::distinct() |>
  dplyr::mutate(

>     is_multiplexed = ifelse(additional_modalities == "cellhash", "Multiplexed", "No multiplexing")

Reviewer: I'm surprised this spacing gets past the precommit hook, might have expected it to want something like, 

```suggestion
    is_multiplexed = ifelse(
      additional_modalities == "cellhash", 
      "Multiplexed", 
      "No multiplexing")
```

I guess I trust the bots? Should I trust the bots? Well, I trust you to choose the right spacing  :)

Author: I think its because of the line length. It's not long enough to require a new line for each argument.

  ) |>
  dplyr::count(is_multiplexed) |>
  dplyr::rename(
    "Library type" = "is_multiplexed",
    "Number of libraries" = "n"
  )

make_kable(multiplex_table)
```

# Sample information

```{r, results='asis'}
if (multiplexed) {
  # get the total number of libraries that have been multiplexed
  n_multiplexed <- multiplex_table |>
    dplyr::filter(`Library type` == "Multiplexed") |>
    dplyr::pull(`Number of libraries`)

  glue::glue("
    <div class=\"alert alert-info\">

    This merged object contains {n_multiplexed} libraries that have been multiplexed.

>     Demultiplexing has not been performed, so sample statistics will not be displayed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Demultiplexing has not been performed, so sample information will not be displayed.
```

    </div>
  ")
}
```

```{r, eval=!multiplexed}
# get total number of samples and libraries
num_samples <- merged_sce$sample_id |>
  unique() |>
  length()
```

```{r, eval=!multiplexed, results='asis'}
glue::glue(
  "
  The merged object summarized in this report contains {num_samples} samples.
  "
)
```

```{r, eval=!multiplexed}
knitr::asis_output("
## Diagnoses

> The following table shows the total number of samples associated with each diagnoses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows the total number of samples associated with each diagnosis.
```

> If subdiagnosis is available, the total number of samples will be obtained for each unique combination of diagnosis and subdiagnosis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a subdiagnosis is available, the total number of samples will be shown for each unique combination of diagnosis and subdiagnosis.
```
